Original:    The languages in this family include Perl 5 and Perl 6.
Processed:   The languages include Perl 5 and Perl 6.
"The languages" --> "?"

Original:    Though Perl is not officially an acronym, there are various backronyms in use, the most well-known being "Practical Extraction and Reporting Language".
Processed:   There Are Various Backronyms In Use , The Most Well-known Being `` Practical Extraction And Reporting Language ''.
Expected:   Though Perl is not officially an acronym, there are various backronyms in use. The most well-known backronym is "Practical Extraction and Reporting Language".

Original:    Since then, it has undergone many changes and revisions.
Processed:   It Has Undergone Many Changes And Revisions.
Expected:   Since..., Perl Has Undergone Many Changes And Revisions.

Original:    Both languages continue to be developed independently by different development teams and liberally borrow ideas from one another.
Processed:   Both languages continue to be developed independently by different development teams and liberally borrow ideas from one another.

Original:    The Perl languages borrow features from other programming languages including C, shell script (sh), AWK, and sed.
Processed:   The Perl languages borrow features from other programming languages including C , shell script -LRB- sh -RRB- , AWK , and sed.
-LRB- sh -RRB-

Original:    They provide powerful text processing facilities without the arbitrary data-length limits of many contemporary Unix commandline tools, facilitating easy manipulation of text files.
Processed:   They provide powerful text processing facilities without the arbitrary data-length limits of many contemporary Unix commandline tools , facilitating easy manipulation of text files.
remove facilitating...

Original:    In 1998, it was also referred to as the "duct tape that holds the Internet together", in reference to both its ubiquitous use as a glue language and its perceived inelegance.
Processed:   It Was Also Referred To As The `` Duct Tape That Holds The Internet Together '' , In Reference To Both Its Ubiquitous Use As A Glue Language And Its Perceived Inelegance.
In 1998 missing

Original:    Larry Wall began work on Perl in 1987, while working as a programmer at Unisys, and released version 1.0 to the comp.sources.misc newsgroup on December 18, 1987.
Processed:   Larry Wall began work on Perl in 1987 , while working as a programmer at Unisys , and released version 1.0 to the comp.sources.misc newsgroup on December 18 , 1987.
Expected:   Larry Wall began work on Perl in 1987, while working as a programmer at Unisys. Larry Hall released version 1.0 to the comp.sources.misc newsgroup on December 18, 1987.

Original:    Perl 2, released in 1988, featured a better regular expression engine.
Processed:   Perl 2 released in 1988.
Expected:   Perl 2 is released in 1988.

Original:    Perl 3, released in 1989, added support for binary data streams.
Processed:   Perl 3 released in 1989.
Processed:   Perl 3 is released in 1989.

Original:    Perl 3, released in 1989, added support for binary data streams.
Processed:   Perl 3 added support for binary data streams.

Original:    Perl 3, released in 1989, added support for binary data streams.
Processed:   Perl 3 streams.
very short sentences could be removed or given lower rank

Original:    Originally the only documentation for Perl was a single (increasingly lengthy) man page.
Processed:   The Only Documentation Was A Single -LRB- Increasingly Lengthy -RRB- Man Page.
-LRB- Increasingly Lengthy -RRB-

Original:    In 1991, Programming Perl, known to many Perl programmers as the "Camel Book" because of its cover, was published and became the de facto reference for the language.
Processed:   Programming Perl known to many Perl programmers as the `` Camel Book '' because of its cover.
Processed:   Programming Perl is known to many Perl programmers as the `` Camel Book '' because of its cover.

Original:    In 1991, Programming Perl, known to many Perl programmers as the "Camel Book" because of its cover, was published and became the de facto reference for the language.
Processed:   Programming Perl was published and became the de facto reference for the language.

Original:    At the same time, the Perl version number was bumped to 4, not to mark a major change in the language but to identify the version that was well documented by the book.
Processed:   Was Bumped To 4 , Not To Mark A Major Change In The Language But To Identify The Version That Was Well Documented By The Book.
1) we should not capitalize so many words
2) "the Perl version number " was bumped to 4

Original:    Perl 4 went through a series of maintenance releases, culminating in Perl 4.036 in 1993.
Processed:   Perl 4 went through a series of maintenance releases , culminating in Perl 4.036 in 1993.

Original:    Initial design of Perl 5 continued into 1994.
Processed:   Initial design continued into 1994.
"of Perl 5 " missing

Original:    The perl5-porters mailing list was established in May 1994 to coordinate work on porting Perl 5 to different platforms.
Processed:   Was Established In May 1994 To Coordinate Work On Porting Perl 5 To Different Platforms.
"The perl5-porters mailing list " missing

Original:    Importantly, modules provided a mechanism for extending the language without modifying the interpreter.
Processed:   Modules Provided A Mechanism For Extending The Language Without Modifying The Interpreter.

Original:    This allowed the core interpreter to stabilize, even as it enabled ordinary Perl programmers to add new language features.
Processed:   This allowed the core interpreter to stabilize , even as it enabled ordinary Perl programmers to add new language features.
"This" --> "a mechanism for extending the language without modifying the interpreter"

Original:    This allowed the core interpreter to stabilize, even as it enabled ordinary Perl programmers to add new language features.
Processed:   This to stabilize.
wrong
"This" -->?

Original:    Perl 5 has been in active development since then.
Processed:   Perl 5 has been in active development since then.
"then" --> ?

Original:    One of the most important events in Perl 5 history took place outside of the language proper and was a consequence of its module support.
Processed:   One took place outside of the language proper and was a consequence of its module support.
"one of sth" --> "one"?

Original:    On October 26, 1995, the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network (CPAN) was established as a repository for Perl modules and Perl itself; as of June 2015, it carries over 150,775 modules in 31,896 distributions, written by more than 12,219 authors, and is mirrored worldwide at more than 253 locations.
Processed:   CPAN was established as a repository for Perl modules and Perl itself ; as of June 2015 , it carries over 150,775 modules in 31,896 distributions , written by more than 12,219 authors , and is mirrored worldwide at more than 253 locations.

Original:    Perl 5.004 was released on May 15, 1997, and included among other things the UNIVERSAL package, giving Perl a base object to which all classes were automatically derived and the ability to require versions of modules.
Processed:   Perl 5.004 was released on May 15 , 1997 , and included among other things the UNIVERSAL package , giving Perl a base object to which all classes were automatically derived and the ability to require versions of modules.

Original:    Another significant development was the inclusion of the CGI.pm module, which contributed to Perl's popularity as a CGI scripting language.
Processed:   Another significant development was the inclusion of the CGI.pm module , which contributed to Perl 's popularity as a CGI scripting language.
