Clint Dempsey


Clinton Drew "Clint" Dempsey (born March 9, 1983) is an American soccer player who plays for Tottenham Hotspur and the United States national team.
Growing up in Nacogdoches, Texas, Dempsey played for one of the top youth soccer clubs in the state, the Dallas Texans, before playing for Furman University's men's soccer team. In 2004, Dempsey was drafted by Major League Soccer club New England Revolution, where he quickly integrated himself into the starting lineup. Hindered initially by a jaw injury, he would eventually score 25 goals in 71 appearances with the Revolution. Between 2007 and 2012, Dempsey played for Premier League team Fulham and is the club's highest Premier League goalscorer of all time.
Dempsey first represented the United States at the 2003 FIFA World Youth Championship in the United Arab Emirates. He made his first appearance with the senior team on November 17, 2004, against Jamaica; he was then named to the squad for the 2006 World Cup and scored the team's only goal of the tournament. Dempsey recorded the fastest goal in U.S. World Cup qualifying history by scoring after 53 seconds of an eventual 8–0 defeat of Barbados. He later bested that feat in 2012 scoring just 36 seconds into a 1–2 qualifying loss at Jamaica. In the 2010 FIFA World Cup, Dempsey scored against England, becoming the second American, after Brian McBride, to score goals in multiple World Cup tournaments. Dempsey became the first American player to score a hat-trick in the English Premier League, in the 5–2 win over Newcastle United in January 2012.


Youth
Dempsey was born in Nacogdoches, Texas and, for much of his childhood, his family lived in a trailer park, where he and his siblings grew up playing soccer with the local children or anyone they could find. His older brother Ryan was offered a tryout for the Dallas Texans, an elite youth soccer club, and brought Clint, who was noticed and recruited while passing time juggling a ball on the sidelines. Dempsey became a standout on the team at an early age, but had to quit due to his family's time and money constraints as his eldest sister Jennifer was becoming a ranked youth tennis player. Several parents of his teammates with the Texans offered to assist the Dempseys with expenses and travel, allowing him to rejoin the club.
On November 27, 1995, Dempsey lost his then 16-year-old sister Jennifer to a brain aneurysm. Dempsey was devastated with the family's loss and later explained that this event helped him developed a deeper motivation to pursue soccer; in honor of his sister.
He went on to be the captain and high scorer of the Texans and was honored with the MVP of the Tampa Bay Sun Bowl tournament. Dempsey studied the play of Argentina's national team, especially Diego Maradona. Clint was heartbroken when the news came to Nacogdoches that Maradona would not be playing in the 1994 World Cup game played in the Cotton Bowl. He attended Furman University as a health and exercise major and a key player for Paladins football.


Club career


New England Revolution
New England Revolution selected Clint Dempsey eighth overall in the 2004 MLS SuperDraft. In his rookie season, he started 23 of 24 matches scoring seven goals. Dempsey helped the Revolution to the Eastern Conference Finals and earned 2004 MLS Rookie of the Year Honors. In 2005, Dempsey contributed ten goals and nine assists in 26 games. He scored the game-winning goal in the Eastern Conference Final on his way to an appearance in the MLS Cup Final. In 2006, Dempsey added 8 more goals, but missed significant time in the playoffs due to injury. He came on as a substitute in the MLS Cup Final, but the Revolution lost their second straight final, this time in a penalty shoot-out.


Fulham


2006–07 season

In December 2006, English club Fulham offered MLS $4 million for the transfer of Dempsey, then the largest amount ever offered for an MLS player and became another American addition to the Cottagers roster. On January 11, 2007, he was granted a work permit from the Home Office as Fulham announced his signing on a long-term deal. This made Dempsey the most expensive US export to the Premier League in a deal worth a reported £2 million. He made his Fulham debut in a 1–1 home draw against Tottenham Hotspur on January 20, 2007. His FA Cup debut followed seven days later in a 3–0 home win over Stoke City. Dempsey scored his first goal for Fulham on 5 May when he struck the only goal of a 1–0 home win over Liverpool. This goal saved Fulham from relegation and effectively guaranteed their place in the top-flight for the following season.


2007–08 season
On August 25, Dempsey scored his first goal of the 2007–08 season in a 2–1 away loss to Aston Villa. He followed this up by scoring in Fulham's next fixture in a 3–3 home draw against Tottenham on 1 September. Two weeks later, he opened the scoring in Fulham's 1–1 away draw against Wigan Athletic. These goals gave Dempsey three in as many games after Fulham manager Lawrie Sanchez's decision to convert Dempsey into a striker following an injury to compatriot Brian McBride. On September 29, Dempsey was involved in an aerial collision with John Terry during a 0–0 draw at Stamford Bridge which resulted in Terry being substituted. There was some suggestion that Dempsey used a deliberate elbow on Terry; however, he wasn't punished for the incident as referee Martin Atkinson didn't report it to the Football Association. On November 3, Dempsey scored during Fulham's 3–1 home win over Reading to secure just a second league win of the season. He scored his last goals of the season in a 1–1 home draw with Wigan Athletic and 5–1 away loss to Tottenham in December. In May 2008, Fulham announced Dempsey had signed a contract extension which would keep him at the club until the summer of 2010. Fulham beat Portsmouth 1–0 on the final day of the season to secure Premier League status for another year. He ended the season as Fulham's top Premier League goalscorer with six goals.


2008–09 season
Dempsey scored his first goal of the 2008–09 season in a 1–1 away draw at Portsmouth on October 26. His first home goal of the season came in a 3–0 win over Middlesbrough on December 20. Eight days later he scored twice in the West London derby against Chelsea which included a last-minute equaliser in a 2–2 home draw. On February 24, 2009, Dempsey scored the first FA Cup goal of his career in a 2–1 home win over Swansea City in the fifth-round. His final home goal of the season came in a 2–1 defeat to Blackburn Rovers on March 11. Fulham came from a goal down to beat Manchester City 3–1 away from home as Dempsey scored two goals on April 12. For the second successive season, Dempsey ended as Fulham's top Premier League goalscorer joint with Andrew Johnson with seven goals. These goals helped Fulham secure a seventh-place finish in the Premier League, the highest in the club's history, and confirmed their qualification for the newly formed UEFA Europa League for the following season.


2009–10 season
On 13 August 2009, Dempsey signed a contract extension to remain with Fulham through 2013. On August 20, he scored his first goal in European competition, in the newly formed Europa League, netting Fulham's second goal in a 3–1 win against Amkar Perm in the play-off round. On December 30, La Gazzetta dello Sport named Dempsey as one of the top eleven Premier League players of the season. On January 17, 2010, Dempsey suffered a suspected cruciate knee ligament injury in a 2–0 away defeat to Blackburn Rovers. On March 11, Dempsey returned, coming on in the last minute of Fulham's loss away to Juventus, and then completed 72 minutes of their away loss to Manchester United in the league. On March 18, Dempsey came off the bench against Juventus in their second-leg, last-16 tie in the Europa League and scored the winner on a long chip shot. Fulham won the game 4–1 and this game resulted in Fulham winning an award, as well as Dempsey receiving an award for his 'Wonderful' (Quote from the commentator on ESPN) goal.The Guardian suggested that the goal "might become the most famous goal in Fulham's history". On May 12, Dempsey replaced Bobby Zamora in the 55th minute of the 2010 UEFA Europa League Final, thus making history in becoming the first ever American to appear in a major European final. In the end, Fulham lost the match, as Atlético Madrid's Diego Forlán scored in the 116th minute of extra time, giving Atlético a 2–1 win. His performances throughout 2009–10 earned him the designation of Most Valuable Player among Americans in Europe by SoccerOverThere.com, among other sources.


2010–11 season
Dempsey remained a regular starter, one of only five Americans in the Premier League to do so currently. On September 18, 2010, he scored an equalising goal on 56 minutes with a header against Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park in the 1–1 draw and continue Fulham's undefeated streak in the Barclays Premier League. On October 2, he scored against West Ham United past Robert Green, the same keeper that he had scored against in the World Cup. He then continued his form by scoring two goals against Wigan Athletic on October 30 as Fulham ran out 2–0 winners. On January 22, Dempsey scored another double versus Stoke, putting Fulham temporarily out of relegation contention.
On March 19, Dempsey became the first American to score 10 goals in a Premier League season, beating Brian McBride's previous record of nine, also set while at Fulham in the 2005–06 season and 2006–07 season.
Clint Dempsey broke Fulham's Premier League goalscoring record by netting twice in a 3–0 victory over Bolton on April 27, 2011. He has scored a total of 33 goals for the team in the Premier League, topping both Brian McBride and Steed Malbranque, each with 32. With these goals, he scored 12 goals for Fulham in the 2010–11 season.
At the end of the season, Dempsey was voted Fulham player of the season by the Fulham fans and his 12 Premier League strikes meant he was the club's leading goalscorer for the campaign.


2011–12 season
Dempsey marked his return to the first team by scoring a brace in the first leg of their Europa League play-off clash against Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk at Craven Cottage. Dempsey ended with two goals as Fulham ran out 3–0 winners, setting up a comfortable second leg in Ukraine. On December 5, 2011, Dempsey scored in the 85th minute to secure a 1–0 win against Liverpool at Craven Cottage. The goal propelled Dempsey to become the most prolific American goalscorer in the Premier League, passing Fulham legend and fellow American Brian McBride. Dempsey scored his fifth Premier League goal of the campaign with a header in a 2–0 home win against Bolton on December 17, lifting his side six points clear of the drop zone.
In the club's West London derby against rivals Chelsea on Boxing Day, Dempsey scored the equalizing goal as the game ended in a 1–1 draw. He then scored the first hat-trick of his career on January 7 against Charlton in their FA Cup Third Round game which ended in a 4–0 victory. On 21 January 2012, Dempsey scored another hat-trick against Newcastle while the game ended in a 5–2 win for Fulham and sent his goal tally in the Premier League to nine for the season. With his hat-trick against Newcastle, he became the first ever American player to score a hat-trick in the Premier League. Dempsey scored his 10th Premier League goal of the season, sixteenth in all competitions, in a 1–1 draw against former manager Roy Hodgson's West Brom on February 1, 2011. This recent run of good form has seen Dempsey play higher-up the field into an orthodox striker position. He "assisted" another goal in a 2–1 win against Stoke City on February 11, 2012. His 28th-minute shot hit the crossbar and was deflected by Stoke goalkeeper Thomas Sørensen. It was therefore awarded as an own goal off the goalie. His form this season continued against Wolverhampton Wanderers where Dempsey scored twice in a 5–0 victory for Fulham. On 8 March 2012, the day before Dempsey's 29th birthday, Fulham manager Martin Jol revealed that the club have opened talks with the American over a new three-year contract.
Dempsey scored his fourteenth and fifteenth Premier League goals of the campaign, bringing his tally to twenty-one in all competitions, in a 3–0 away win over Bolton Wanderers on April 7, the first a free kick and the second a header. The strikes moved Dempsey past Louis Saha's record of thirteen Premier League goals for the club in a single season. Dempsey finished fourth on the FWA Footballer of the Year list behind winner Robin van Persie and Manchester United pair Wayne Rooney and Paul Scholes, who came in second and third, respectively. Dempsey became the first American to reach the milestone of fifty goals in the Premier League, with a free-kick against Sunderland in the last home game of the season.
On 7 June 2012, Dempsey was voted the Fulham 'Player of the Season' by fans for the second straight season. On 31 August 2012, Fulham confirmed Dempsey's transfer to Tottenham Hotspur.


Tottenham Hotspur
On 31 August 2012, Dempsey joined Tottenham Hotspur on a three-year contract for a fee believed to be in the region of £6 million ($9.5 million). The deal made Dempsey the highest salaried US football player of all time. With the 23 shirt that he wore at Fulham and the number 8 that he usually wears on international duty unavailable, he opted for the number 2 jersey which he wore at Furman University. Dempsey scored his first and the game-winning goal for Tottenham in a 3–2 win over Manchester United. It was the first time in 23 years that Tottenham had won at Old Trafford. He scored his second goal for Spurs in the 39th minute in an away game at Southampton in October. Dempsay 3rd goal was scored against Reading on New Year's day 2013 to help his Spurs side win 3–1. In the FA Cup 3rd round, he scored a double against Coventry. 


International career

Dempsey first played for the United States national team at the 2003 FIFA World Youth Championship in the United Arab Emirates. He made his first appearance with the senior team on November 17, 2004, against Jamaica. He has frequently lined up as a striker due to his scoring threat and aerial ability, but his preferred and more normal role is off the striker. He won the highest individual honor in football in America when he was named Honda Player of the Year for 2006, beating Fulham teammates Kasey Keller and Brian McBride in a poll of sportswriters. Dempsey received 237 points in voting by 207 sports journalists to claim the award.
On May 2, 2006, Dempsey was named to the U.S. roster for the 2006 World Cup in Germany. He was the only American player to score a goal in the tournament with his equalizing goal in the Americans' eventual 2–1 loss to Ghana.
In the United States' opening 2010 World Cup qualifier, Dempsey recorded the then fastest goal in U.S. qualifying history with a chest trap and sliding shot 53 seconds into a 8–0 defeat of Barbados. But thereafter, Dempsey experienced a dip in form leading some to doubt his first-choice status with the national team. However, Dempsey turned his fortunes around in the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup. In the final group stage match against Egypt, Dempsey scored a trademark diving header off a Jonathan Spector cross, making the final result 3–0. This, combined with Brazil's 3–0 victory against Italy in the other group match that was being played simultaneously, put the U.S. through to the semifinals. In the semi-final match against Spain, Dempsey scored to put the USA up 2–0 to send them to the finals. He was named the Man of the Match for his performance. Dempsey scored in his third straight game in the Confederations Cup Final against Brazil, redirecting a similar cross from Spector in the 10th minute to open the scoring. Following the loss, he was awarded the Bronze Ball as the tournament's 3rd best performer. He ended the World Cup qualifying campaign tied with Landon Donovan as the team's second top scorer, behind Jozy Altidore, with five goals in thirteen matches.
On June 12, 2010, Dempsey became the second American (after Brian McBride) to score in more than one World Cup when he scored the equalizer goal against England in the Americans' first game of the 2010 World Cup after the West Ham and England goalkeeper Robert Green made a major error. Dempsey's disallowed goal later in the tournament vs. Algeria in the group stage was very controversial. Dempsey was called offside, but the replay showed that he was most likely not offside. Despite this call, his teammate Landon Donovan scored a late stoppage time goal to win the game 1–0.
During the 2011 Gold Cup, Dempsey played a key role in helping the U.S. advance to the finals. In the group stages he recorded a goal in a 2–0 win over Canada, and in the quarterfinals, Dempsey also scored a goal in a 2–0 win over Jamaica. In the semi-finals against Panama, who had shockingly defeated the U.S. 1–2 in the group stage, Dempsey scored the only goal to advance the Americans to the final. With a sliding touch Dempsey redirected U.S. Midfielder Landon Donovan's pass into the net.
On February 29, 2012, Dempsey scored the lone goal in an international friendly against four time World Cup Champion Italy. Jozy Altidore assisted on the goal, allowing the U.S. to win for the first time against Italy in eleven games played since 1934.
Dempsey broke his own fastest-goal record in World Cup Qualifying on September 7, scoring just 39 seconds into a 2–1 defeat against Jamaica in Kingston. During a qualifying match against Guatemala on October 16, 2012, Dempsey scored his 29th and 30th international goal, tying him with Brian McBride for third most goals scored for the U.S. National Team. The goals helped the U.S. advance into the final qualifying stage for World Cup 2014.


International goals


Playing style
Dempsey is a versatile right footed withdrawn forward, normally playing on the left or right for Fulham and the United States, at times shooting from long distances and even scoring at club level from said long range shots. However, he has also proven to be more of a threat the closer to goal he gets. His goals against Egypt and Spain in the Confederations Cup came almost immediately after being moved to forward by a substitution from Bob Bradley.
Known for his toughness and resilience, Dempsey played two games for New England Revolution with a broken jaw in 2004 before the team trainer diagnosed it, and upon his return, he played through the pain of a sprained ankle. Despite usually playing in wide positions, he frequently scores close-range goals and has scored repeatedly with diving headers in crowded situations.
His tenacity in midfield combined with his audacious close control dribbling skills frequently results in opponents fouling him, and Dempsey has gained a reputation for fierce play. This has on several occasions lapsed into violent conduct. He was suspended by the New England Revolution for two weeks in March 2006 for a fist fight with teammate Joe Franchino during a practice game and was twice suspended by MLS during the 2006 season for violent conduct against opponents, including an elbow that broke the jaw of national teammate Jimmy Conrad. In a similar incident with Fulham in 2007, Dempsey accidentally broke the cheekbone of Chelsea defender John Terry in an aerial challenge but was not penalized. A further similar incident, in December 2011, took place in a match against Manchester United, with Dempsey accidentally elbowing opponent Phil Jones in the side of the head and causing a suspected broken cheekbone. Again no action was taken by the referee.


Career statistics


Club
As of 23:00, 24 December 2012 (UTC)


International
As of 17 October 2012


Honors


Club
New England Revolution
Runner-up
MLS Cup (2): 2005, 2006
MLS Supporters' Shield (1): 2005

Fulham
Runner-up
UEFA Europa League (1): 2009–10


International
United States
Winner
CONCACAF Gold Cup (2): 2005, 2007

Runner-up
FIFA Confederations Cup (1): 2009


Individual
MLS Rookie of the Year Award (1): 2004
Honda Player of the Year (2): 2006, 2011
MLS Best XI (2): 2005, 2006
U.S. Soccer Athlete of the Year (3): 2007, 2011, 2012
FIFA Confederations Cup Bronze Ball (1): 2009
Fulham Player of the Season (2): 2010–11, 2011–12
Premiership Player of the Season: 4th place in 2011–12


Personal life
Dempsey is married to Bethany Keegan Dempsey. They have a daughter named Elyse and a son named Jackson.[citation needed] In his spare time he is a fisherman.


Music
One of Dempsey's passions outside of soccer is hip hop music. Using the alias "Deuce," he, along with fellow Texas rappers XO and the late Houston rapper Big Hawk from the Screwed Up Click, are featured rapping the song "Don't Tread" in a Nike football advertising campaign for the 2006 World Cup with the intention to showcase both the sport's working-class roots and the United States team ahead of the World Cup. The song's video is dedicated to his sister Jennifer, who, at age sixteen, was suddenly struck with a fatal brain aneurysm. At Dempsey's request, the video ends with a shot of him placing a flower at her grave.


Notes


References


External links
Profile at Yanks Abroad
Clint Dempsey career stats at Soccerbase
Clint Dempsey profile Fulham FC
Clint Dempsey profile Transfermarkt
Andrea Scanzi La palombella rossa di Clint Dempsey La Stampa, 19 March 2010
Premier League profile
Profile at SoccerSurfer.com
Clint Dempsey – UEFA competition record
